THANKS FOR
BEING HERE TONIGHT.
SO I HAVE A PRESENTATION I'D
LIKE TO SHARE WITH YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANY DESIRE TO DO
INTRODUCTIONS OR ARE WE A SMALL
ENOUGH GROUP THAT WE'RE OK?
EVERYBODY FEELING PRETTY GOOD?
YEAH, OK.
JUST CHECKING A SECOND.
SO ON THE AGENDA TONIGHT I'M
GOING TO BRIEFLY TALK ABOUT THE
PURPOSE OF THIS JOINT WORK
SESSION AND THEN WE HAVE THREE
MAIN SECTIONS OF THE
PRESENTATION I'M GOING TO TALK
ABOUT THE PARKING SYSTEM, THE
NEW ELEVATED PROGRAM AND THE
WORK THAT WE'VE BEEN DOING ON
OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
>> SO THE PURPOSE OF THIS JOINT
WORK SESSION, THIS WORK SESSION
IS A REQUIREMENT OF THE CITY
AND DA'S PARKING AGREEMENT.
SO BACK IN IT STARTED AROUND
TWENTY 10 BUT IN 2011 IT WAS
FINALIZED.
THERE WERE NEGOTIATIONS
HAPPENING BETWEEN THE CITY AND
THE SURROUNDING THE AMOUNT
OF PARKING REVENUE THAT THE
CITY RECEIVES AT THAT TIME IT
WAS DETERMINED THAT THE CITY
WOULD RECEIVE 17 PERCENT
OF GROSS PARKING REVENUE AND AT
THAT SAME TIME THEY INSTITUTED
THIS REQUIREMENT IN THE PARKING
AGREEMENT.
SO THIS MEETING IS FOR US TO
TALK ABOUT PARKING RATES,
PARKING OPERATIONS AND OTHER
MATTERS OF MUTUAL INTEREST.
>> SO I CANNOT DO A
PRESENTATION WITHOUT SHARING
THIS SLIDE.
I KNOW I HAVE SOME DDA BOARD
MEMBERS WHO ARE REALLY SICK
OF SEEING THE SLIDE BUT I THINK
IT'S IMPORTANT TO REMIND
EVERYBODY THAT THE DDA DOES RUN
TWO SEPARATE SYSTEMS.
WE RUN THE PARKING SYSTEM ON
BEHALF OF THE CITY AND SUPPORT
SEPARATELY WE RUN THE TAX
INCREMENT FINANCE SYSTEM BETTER
KNOWN AS TIF AND THROUGH IS HOW
WE MAKE OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS IN OUR DOWNTOWN.
THE PARKING SYSTEM DOES NOT
FUND ANY OF OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS AND OUR TIF SYSTEM
DOES NOT FUND THE PARKING
SYSTEM.
>> SO TO START I'M GOING TO DO
A REVIEW OF THE PARKING SYSTEM
SO JUST SOME BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
THE DAY AS I JUST MENTIONED
MANAGERS OPERATES AND MAINTAINS
THE PARKING SYSTEM THROUGH AN
AGREEMENT WITH THE CITY PARKING
FACILITIES.
OUR CITY ASSETS.
THE DDA DOES NOT OWN ANY
FACILITIES.
THE PARKING SYSTEM IS A
SELF-SUSTAINING SYSTEM PARKING
FEES MUST COVER PARKING
EXPENDITURES AND PARKING
REVENUE TO SUPPORT OTHER
TRANSPORTATION RELATED
INITIATIVES MOST NOTABLY THE GO
PASS WHICH PROVIDES FREE BUS
SERVICE TO DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEES.
>> THE CITY RECEIVES 20 PERCENT
OF GROSS PARKING REVENUE IN
TWENTY FOUR THAT WAS OVER FOUR
POINT ONE MILLION DOLLARS.
THE CITY MANAGES ENFORCEMENT
AND RECEIVES THAT ENFORCEMENT
REVENUE AND THE CITY MANAGES
AND RECEIVES REVENUE FOR THE
RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT
PROGRAM.
SO WE HAVE SOME GUIDING
PRINCIPLES THAT WE USE IN THE
PARKING SYSTEM THAT REALLY
FACTOR INTO EVERY DECISION THAT
WE MAKE SURROUNDING THE PARKING
SYSTEM.
TWO OF THOSE PRIORITIES THOUGH
ARE JUST NON-NEGOTIABLE.
WE MUST RUN A FINANCIALLY SOUND
PARKING SYSTEM AND WE ARE
OBLIGATED TO MAINTAIN THESE
FACILITIES FOR THE CITY OVER
THE LAST TWO YEARS WE HAVE BEEN
UNDERWAY WITH TWO MAJOR STUDIES
THAT WILL HELP US WITH PARKING
STRATEGY GUIDANCE INTO THE
FUTURE.
THE COMPREHENSIVE PARKING RATE
STUDY WE TALKED ABOUT THAT LAST
YEAR AT THIS TIME AT THIS WORK
SESSION THAT STUDY WAS
COMPLETED THIS PAST WINTER AND
A THREE YEAR SCHEDULE OF RATES
WAS IMPLEMENTED IN JUNE.
AT THE SAME TIME WE WERE
UNDERWAY WITH A CURBSIDE
MANAGEMENT STUDY.
THAT STUDY WAS COMPLETED THIS
SUMMER AND WITH THAT STUDY WHAT
WE WERE REALLY LOOKING FOR WAS
GUIDANCE ON MANAGING VEHICLE
ACCESS AT THE CURB AND AN
INFORMED AND EQUITABLE WAY AND
WE REALLY WANTED TO GET A GOOD
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT'S
CURRENTLY HAPPENING AT THE CURB
.
SO I WANT TO TALK ABOUT JUST A
FEW OF THE KEY FINDINGS FROM
THAT STUDY.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THE
CONSULTANT TEAM
WAS HAPPY TO
LET US KNOW THAT WE THE ANN
ARBOR HAS ALREADY MADE SOME
STRIDES WHEN IT COMES TO
CURBSIDE MANAGEMENT.
>> SO WE'VE LONG RECOGNIZED
THAT OUR CURBSIDE IS FOR MORE
THAN JUST STORING VEHICLES,
MORE THAN JUST PARKING.
THERE'S HIGHER USE FOR THAT
CURB.
SO OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS WE
HAVE MADE CHANGES TO THE
CURBSIDE THINGS LIKE ADDING
BIKE LANES WITH EVERY PROJECT
WE TYPICALLY LOOK AT ADDING
LOADING ZONES AND DROP OFF PICK
UP AREAS.
SO WE HAVE ALREADY STARTED
MOVING IN A DIRECTION THAT A
LOT OF COMMUNITIES OUR
CONSULTANT TEAM WAS WORKING
WITH ARE JUST STARTING TO THINK
ABOUT.
SO THAT WAS POSITIVE.
THE STUDY THE DATA FROM THE
STUDY ALSO SHOWED THAT THE
MAJORITY OF OUR STAYS AT THE
CURB ARE SHORT TERM SO ABOUT 60
PERCENT OF PEOPLE PARKING AT
THE CURB ARE PARKING FOR UNDER
FIFTEEN MINUTES AND ABOUT 20
PERCENT OF PARKING FOR LESS
THAN TWO MINUTES.
AND WHAT THEY FOUND WAS THE
CURB IS ACTUALLY MEETING THE
NEEDS AT THE CURBSIDE BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE BASICALLY PARKING
ANYWHERE.
SO ALTHOUGH THE CURB IS MEETING
THE NEEDS, IT'S CREATING OTHER
PROBLEMS.
>> SO WE FOUND THAT PEOPLE ARE
PARKING IN LOADING ZONES.
PEOPLE ARE PARKING IN DRIVEWAYS
AT FIRE HYDRANTS.
>> SO WE KNOW THAT WE NEED TO
REALLY LOOK AT OUR SHORT TERM
PARKING INVENTORY, THESE SHORT
TERM STAYS ARE ALSO VERY
DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE.
SO OUR ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS ARE
TYPICALLY IN THE PAST MANY
YEARS ARE MANAGING A CURB THAT
HAS ABOUT TWO HOUR PARKING IS
PRETTY MUCH OUR NORM.
>> SO A DIFFERENT STRATEGY IS
REQUIRED WHEN YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT THESE REALLY SHORT TERM
DAYS AND THE OTHER PIECE
OF INFORMATION WE GOT FROM FROM
THIS STUDY WHICH REALLY JUST
CONFIRMS SORT OF WHAT WE WERE
ALREADY SEEING IS THAT CURB
BEHAVIOR NOT ONLY CHANGES FROM
NEIGHBORHOOD TO NEIGHBORHOOD
BUT BLOCK BY BLOCK IN S
UNIVERSITY IS A REALLY GOOD
EXAMPLE OF A NEIGHBORHOOD THAT
HAS SEEN CHANGES OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS.
AND WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THE
CHANGES THAT HAVE OCCURRED IN S
UNIVERSITY AND YOU THINK ABOUT
THE DENSE RESIDENTIAL STUDENT
HIGH RISES THAT HAVE BEEN BUILT
THAT HAS REALLY CHANGED THE
BEHAVIOR AT THE CURB WHEN YOU
THINK ABOUT THE AMOUNT
OF RESIDENTS THAT ARE ON A
BLOCK AND THE NUMBER OF AMAZON
DELIVERIES AND FOOD DELIVERIES
AND UBER LYFT DROPOFFS, THE
NEED FOR SHORT TERM PARKING IN
AREAS LIKE THAT HAS JUST
DRAMATICALLY INCREASED.
>> SO A FEW COMPONENTS OF THE
STUDY THAT I WANT TO HIGHLIGHT
THE FIRST IS THE MODERNIZING
CURBSIDE PARKING PRICING AND
BASICALLY WHAT THE STUDY TELLS
US IS THAT PARKING PRICING IS A
TOOL TO HELP US MANAGE OUR CURB
INCREASING RATES.
WE'VE ALREADY DONE THAT IN
INCREASING OUR INVENTORY
OF SHORT TERM SPACES IS
SOMETHING THAT WE NEED TO LOOK
AT.
WE UNDERSTAND THAT THERE ARE
ENFORCEMENT IMPLICATIONS TO
DOING THAT.
WE HAVE ALREADY STARTED
CONVERSATIONS WITH ENFORCEMENT
PAID PARKING HOURS.
WE KNOW THAT WE ARE NOT
CHARGING AT THE CURB WHEN WE
HAVE PEAK DEMAND SO OUR
ENFORCEMENT HOURS END AT SIX
O'CLOCK AND WE HAVE QUITE A BIT
OF PARKING DEMAND HAPPENING
BEYOND THAT TIME.
EVENING ENFORCEMENT HOURS IS A
CONVERSATION THAT HAS BEEN
TALKED ABOUT OVER THE YEARS.
IT IS DEFINITELY NOT SOMETHING
THAT IS EMBRACED BY THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY.
HOWEVER, I BELIEVE THAT IT IS
AN AREA THAT WE WILL BE
EXPLORING AT SOME POINT.
>> WE ARE NOT EXPLORING IT
RIGHT NOW.
I SUSPECT WHEN WE LOOK AT RATES
AGAIN EVENING ENFORCEMENT IS
SOMETHING THAT WILL PROBABLY BE
ON THE TABLE.
UM LOOKING FOR GUIDANCE ON
DEVELOPING STANDARDS FOR ON
STREATOR SPACES WAS ANOTHER
SIGNIFICANT COMPONENT OF THIS
STUDY.
>> RIGHT NOW THERE ARE
STANDARDS IN PLACE FOR OFF
STREET ADA PARKING AND WE WE
HAVE THOSE STANDARDS IN PLACE
CURRENTLY THERE ARE NEW
STANDARDS BEING DEVELOPED FOR
ADA ON STREET SPACES THAT ARE
MAKING THEIR WAY THROUGH THE
FEDERAL PROCESS.
NONE OF THESE STANDARDS HAVE
YET TO BE ADOPTED.
>> HOWEVER THERE ARE TWO THERE
ARE TWO PARTS TO THIS THESE NEW
GUIDELINES AND WE ARE WORKING
TOWARDS INSTITUTING BOTH
COMPONENTS.
>> SO ONE IS QUANTITY.
THE NEW PROPOSED GUIDELINES
REQUIRE ONE ADA SPACE FOR EVERY
TWENTY FIVE PAID SPACES ON A
BLOCK PERIMETER.
>> SO IT'S A NEW WAY FOR US TO
BE LOOKING AT AT BLOCKS WE
TYPICALLY LOOK AT BLOCK FACES
AND THIS IS LOOKING AT THE
BLOCK PERIMETER.
SO WE HAVE COMPLETED A REVIEW
OF ALL OF THE BLOCK PERIMETERS
DOWNTOWN AND WE KNOW THAT WE
NEED TO CONVERT ABOUT SIXTY
SPACES.
WE HAVE FORTY EIGHT SPACES THAT
WE ARE CURRENTLY WORKING WITH
THE CITY ON GETTING CONVERTED
BY THE END OF THIS YEAR AND IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE WE'RE
LOOKING AT GETTING ABOUT
ANOTHER DOZEN SPACES CONVERTED
WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT ADA
SPACES ON STREET DOWNTOWN IT'S
VERY CHALLENGING OUR DOWNTOWN
SIDEWALKS HAVE HAVE A LOT
OF STUFF ON THEM.
>> THEY HAVE STREET TREES AND
STREET LIGHTS AND STREET
FURNITURE AND BIKE HOOPS.
THERE ARE PAYMENT KIOSKS FOR
PARKING THE AMENITY ZONE
ADJACENT TO THE PARKING AREAS.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT DIFFERENT
TREATMENTS THAT DON'T ALWAYS
LEND THEMSELVES TO BEING
ACCESSIBLE IN SOME AREAS
THERE'S GRASS, THERE'S SO
THERE'S A LOT FOR US TO
CONSIDER WHEN WE'RE TRYING TO
LOCATE THESE SPACES.
SO NOT ALL OF THEM WILL BE
TRULY ACCESSIBLE.
HOWEVER, WE'VE DONE OUR BEST TO
LOCATE THEM IN THE SPACES THAT
HAVE THE LEAST AMOUNT
OF CONFLICT.
>> THE SECOND PART OF THE
STANDARD IS RELATED TO DESIGN
SO THERE ARE NEW DESIGN
STANDARDS THAT AGAIN ARE
WORKING THEIR WAY THROUGH THE
FEDERAL PROCESS THAT REALLY
FOCUS ON THE WIDTH OF THE SPACE
AND ACCESS TO THE CURB.
SO WE THESE THESE STANDARDS ARE
FOR STREETS THAT ARE NEWLY
CONSTRUCTED CONSTRUCT IT AND
SUBSTANTIALLY RECONSTRUCTED.
WE ARE STILL WAITING FOR
FURTHER GUIDANCE ON WHAT IT
MEANS TO BE SUBSTANTIALLY
RECONSTRUCTED BUT WE ARE MOVING
FORWARD WITH A PROJECT THAT A
RIGHT OF WAY PROJECT THAT WE
HAVE COMING UP IN THE SPRING ON
NORTH FOURTH AVE. WE WILL BE
ADDING ONE OF THESE ADA SPACES
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THESE
GUIDELINES AND I THINK THE KEY
ON THIS IS GOING TO BE THE
WHERE FEASIBLE PIECE OF IT
BECAUSE WHEN YOU'RE LOOKING AT
DOWNTOWN STREETS AND THE WIDTH
OF SIDEWALKS THROUGHOUT OUR
DOWNTOWN AND THE VARIABILITY
OF THAT THIS TYPE OF DESIGN
WILL NOT BE FEASIBLE IN ALL
LOCATIONS BUT WE ARE WORKING
WORKING TOWARDS ADDING AS MANY
AS WE CAN
.
SO THE STUDY HAD NEAR-TERM
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR US AND SOME
LONGER TERM RECOMMENDATIONS.
SO WE HAVE ALREADY ACCOMPLISHED
A NUMBER OF THE NEAR
RECOMMENDATIONS.
THE RATE INCREASE MEASURING
UTILIZATION ON SUNDAY.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE
NOT DONE BECAUSE OUR GHADAMES
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN UP ON SUNDAY
WE ARE NOW MEASURING
UTILIZATION AND THEN WE DID
COMPLETE THE ACCESSIBLE SPACE
ANALYSIS FOR LONGER TERM
RECOMMENDATIONS EXPANDING THAT
INVENTORY OF SHORT TERM SPACES
IS NEXT ON OUR LIST.
LIKE I MENTIONED, WE HAVE
STARTED DISCUSSIONS WITH
ENFORCEMENT AND THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ARE LOOKING
TO PURSUE EXPLORING OPTIONS TO
MONETIZE OTHER CURBSIDE USERS.
SO THAT WOULD BE THINGS LIKE
MONETIZING LOADING ZONES.
>> THE CONSULTANT THAT WE WORK
WITH DID NOT FEEL THAT THE
TECHNOLOGY IS QUITE THERE YET
FOR US TO PURSUE ANY OF THOSE
OPTIONS AND WE ALSO NEED TO
WORK WITH OUR PARTNERS IN THE
ENFORCEMENT AND THEN EXPLORING
ENFORCEMENT HOURS.
I THINK THIS IS A CONVERSATION
THAT WILL WILL BE COMING UP
EVENTUALLY SO THAT IS ALL I
HAVE ON OUR PARKING SECTION AND
IF ANYBODY HAS QUESTIONS OR
DISCUSSION BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO
THE NEXT SEGMENT
, THANKS SO
JUST TO CLARIFY ON THE SHORT
TERM PARKING RECOMMENDATIONS
THERE IS A WE'RE SEEING THAT
THERE'S THERE'S A BIG DEMAND
FOR THAT FOR THAT SHORT TERM
FIFTEEN MINUTE AND UNDER AND
THEN THERE'S A LOT OF TURNOVER.
BUT IN TERMS OF ACTUALLY
TURNING THOSE INTO PAID SPOTS
THAT'S A LITTLE CHALLENGING.
SO WHAT IS THE INTERIM OPTION
IF WE'RE SEEING THAT THE
TECHNOLOGY ISN'T QUITE THERE?
>> YEAH WELL FOR FOR THE SHORT
TERM SPACES WE COULD CONVERT
SPACES TO PAID 15 MINUTE OR
PAID 30 MINUTE SPACES AND
THAT'S WHERE WE'RE WORKING WITH
ENFORCEMENT TO TALK THROUGH
SOME STRATEGIES ON HOW CAN WE
MAKE THAT WORK.
SO FOR SHORT TERM SPACES WE THE
TECHNOLOGY IS THERE AND WE CAN
MOVE FORWARD.
>> IT'S A MORE
A MATTER
OF COORDINATING WITH
ENFORCEMENT SO THAT'S MORE
OF JUST KIND WHERE IT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN.
>> IT'S OK.
AND THEN IN TERMS OF JUST THAT
THAT OPPORTUNITY FOR THOSE
SPACES THAT ARE THERE, FOLKS
ARE NOT NECESSARILY CONSIDERING
THEMSELVES PARKING RIGHT.
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR A SPOT
OF PICKING UP DROPPING OFF
FOOD, DROPPING OFF SOMEBODY WHO
HAS ACCESSIBILITY ISSUES NEEDS
TO GET TO A BENCH QUICKLY
WHETHER THEY'RE DRIVER PARKS.
HOW ARE WE THINKING ABOUT
ADDRESSING THOSE NEEDS?
WELL, I WHEN WE'RE WHEN WE'RE
WORKING IN PROJECT AREAS WHERE
CAN FIGURING ALL OF THOSE NEEDS
AND THE FIFTH AND DETROIT
PROJECT IS A GOOD EXAMPLE WHERE
WE ADDED PASSENGER DROP OFF AND
LOADING AN ADDITIONAL LOADING
ZONE.
>> SO PROJECT BY PROJECT WE'RE
WE'RE LOOKING AT THOSE NEEDS IN
THROUGH WHEN NEW DEVELOPMENTS
COME UP THROUGH SITE PLAN
REVIEW THOSE LOADING ZONES ARE
NOT LOOKED AT THROUGH THE SITE
PLAN PROCESS.
WE LOOK AT THOSE AFTER THE FACT
SO THAT KIND OF GIVES A LITTLE
BIT MORE FLEXIBILITY.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT'S
BEING LOOKED AT.
I KNOW THAT ONE.
IT'S BEEN A WHILE SINCE I'VE
BEEN ON PLANNING COMMISSION BUT
THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT THERE
WASN'T NECESSARILY A CLEAR WAY
TO REVIEW THOSE PROJECTS AT THE
TIME.
SO THAT'S IMPROVED.
IT'S BEING TALKED ABOUT IN AS A
MATTER OF FACT STAFF WILL BE AT
PLANNING COMMISSION I BELIEVE
IN NOVEMBER.
I HAVE A QUICK QUESTION.
>> UM, SO THIS IS IN REGARDS
AND THANK YOU FOR THIS
PRESENTATION.
IT'S VERY INFORMATIVE.
SO IN REGARDS TO THE CURB USE
STUDY, I WAS WONDERING DID DID
CURB USE BEHAVIOR CHANGE ON
CURB ILLUSTRATES LIKE WHAT WE
DID WITH STATE STREET UM OR SO
WE DIDN'T SPECIFICALLY THAT
WASN'T SPECIFICALLY ADDRESSED
IN THE STUDY BUT I WOULD SAY I
THINK THE BEHAVIOR ON STATES
WHAT WE DID AND WE WERE VERY
COGNIZANT OF THE NEED FOR
ADDITIONAL LOADING ZONES ON
THAT STREET SO WE ADDED LOADING
ZONES ON STATE AND AROUND THE
CORNER ON MAINARD SO AND I
HAVEN'T HEARD PLAINT SO I
ACTUALLY CAN'T REALLY SPEAK WHO
IS IT WORKING?
BUT I WAS WONDERING IF BY
HAVING HER BLISTERY IT'S IT MAY
DISCOURAGE SHORT TERM PARKING
WHERE I WAS JUST THINKING ABOUT
IF THAT COULD BE A FACTOR UM
THAT SOUNDS LIKE IT WASN'T
SPECIFICALLY STUDIED.
SO THE OTHER THING IS THAT UM
YOU KNOW I KNOW THAT YOU WERE
WORKING ON CREATING ACCESSIBLE
PATHWAYS FROM ACCESSIBLE
PARKING SPACES INTO AREAS LIKE
THE STREET CLOSURES ON MAIN
STREET.
THE BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
>> IS THAT SOMETHING THAT IS I
KNOW THAT ACCESSIBLE PATHWAYS
IS SOMETHING THAT CITIES WILL
INCORPORATE AND I WONDER IF
THAT IS GOING TO BE PART
OF SOME OF THESE ADA
IMPROVEMENTS.
UM, WE HAVE NOT SPECIFICALLY
ADDRESSED THAT AND I THINK WHEN
THAT CAME UP MAYBE LAST YEAR OR
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO I CAN'T
REMEMBER NOW BUT IT WAS A
MATTER OF OR THERE WERE A LOT
OF FACTORS BUT ONE FACTOR WAS
DETERMINING WHAT PATH SOMEONE
IS ACTUALLY TAKING RIGHT.
SO I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING NEW TO
REPORT ON THAT FRONT AND YOU
GUYS DID AT THAT TIME AD
ACCESSIBLE.
>> WE ADDED ACCESSIBLE SPACES.
WE DIDN'T DO ANYTHING WITH
PATHWAYS BUT WE ADDED
ACCESSIBLE SPACES WHERE WHICH I
THINK REALLY HELPED.
I THINK YOU ONE OF THE
PERSISTENT ISSUES THAT A LOT
OF UH, COMPLAINTS ABOUT ON
COUNCIL IS PEOPLE PARKING ON
THE BIKE WHETHER THAT'S WITHIN
THE DAY TO DAY BALANCE OR NOT.
BUT SPECIFICALLY AS RELATES TO
DELIA, I'M WONDERING HOW THAT
SHORT TERM PARKING FOR LIKE
AMAZON DELIVERY VEHICLES WHICH
I SEE OFTEN KIND OF JUST QUICK
PULL OVER AND AS YOU NOTED,
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE
BECAUSE BY THE TIME SOMEONE
CALLS IN THAT'S DONE BUT IT'S
REPEATED OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
SO HOW DOES THAT FIT IN WITH
WHAT I UNDERSTAND WITH THE SITE
PLANS A NEW DEVELOPMENT BUT
WHAT ABOUT EXISTING STREET
SPACES?
>> HOW CAN WE BETTER
ACCOMMODATE THAT?
UM, WELL, I THINK FOR IF THERE
ARE PARTICULAR AREA ARE YOU
TALKING THE PROTECTED BIKE?
>> SOME OF THEM ARE DUE TO
HAVE, UH, FLEX POSTS AND SOME
OF THEM NOT SO I THINK IT'S A
COMBINATION OF AN ENGINEERING
ISSUE AND ALSO AN ENFORCEMENT
SLASH WHERE WHERE DO THEY GO?
>> RIGHT.
RIGHT.
SO YEAH, WITH THE PROTECTED
BIKE LANES LIKE YOU JUST
MENTIONED, WE ADDED THOSE MID
BIKEWAY DELINEATOR POSTS IN AS
MANY LOCATIONS AS WE COULD
CONSIDERING THE SNOW REMOVAL
AND SWEEPER EQUIPMENT THAT ALSO
HAS TO GET AROUND THEM AND WE
WE LOOK AT ADDING LOADING ZONES
PARTICULARLY WHEN WE'RE
CONTACTED, YOU KNOW, BY
SOMEBODY IN THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY OR OTHER STAKEHOLDERS
IF THERE IS A NEED AND THROUGH
NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
BUT THE CURBSIDE STUDY ITSELF
DID NOT IDENTIFY A PARTICULAR
PLACE WHERE WE SHOULD BE ADDING
LOADING ZONES.
IT'S MORE ON A CASE BY CASE
BASIS
.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS FOR THE
CITY?
OK, SO WE WILL MOVE ON NOW TO
TALK ABOUT THE DAY'S NEW PUBLIC
ART AND PLACEMAKING PROGRAM
CALLED ELEVATE THE DDA BOARD
APPROVED THIS PROGRAM IN JUNE
AND WE ARE JUST REALLY EXCITED
TO MOVE FORWARD WITH LAUNCHING
SOME PROJECTS.
>> SO THE GOALS OF ELEVATING
ARE TO ELEVATE HISTORY AND
STORYTELLING, DIVERSITY, EQUITY
AND INCLUSION, PLAY INTERACTION
AND CREATIVE AND PLACEMAKING
OUR FIRST ROUND OF PROJECTS.
YOU WILL SEE REALLY FOCUS ON
THE LAST TWO GOALS INTERACTION
,CREATIVITY AND PLACEMAKING
HOWEVER WE HAVE A PROJECT THAT
WE JUST RECENTLY STARTED
EXPLORING THAT I'M VERY EXCITED
TO SHARE AND I'M HOPING IN
NOVEMBER WHEN I HAVE MY COUNCIL
UPDATE I MIGHT HAVE MORE
INFORMATION ON THIS THAT REALLY
THIS PROJECT IS FOCUSING ON
HISTORY STORYTELLING AND
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, INCLUSION.
WE'VE JUST STARTED THE PROCESS
.
MY NEXT STEP IS ACTUALLY TO
TALK TO MR. TONY.
WE HAPPEN TO HAVE A MEETING
TOMORROW SO I'M HOPING BY
NOVEMBER WE MIGHT HAVE SOME
MORE INFORMATION ON THAT
PROJECT.
>> BUT WITH OUR CURRENT
PROJECTS LIKE I MENTIONED, WE
ARE FOCUSING ON THOSE TWO OTHER
GOALS THE ANNUAL BUDGET FOR
THIS FOR THIS PROGRAM IS ONE
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS.
WE HAVE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
FIVE BEING FUNDED THROUGH TEEF
AND FIFTY THROUGH PARKING THIS
YEAR FOR THIS FIRST ROUND
OF PROJECTS WE HAVE MULTIPLE
YEARS OF BUDGET BECAUSE WE
STARTED BUDGETING FOR THIS
PROGRAM IN FY TWENTY FOUR.
>> SO IT'S GOING TO ALLOW US TO
DO A LOT IN THE FIRST YEAR.
THERE'S DEFINITELY SPONSOR
SPONSORSHIP POTENTIAL WITH SOME
OF THESE PROJECTS AND THEN
SEPARATELY FROM THAT ONE
SEVENTY FIVE WE WILL BE
DEDICATING ONE PERCENT OF ALL
OF OUR CAPITAL PROJECTS FOR
ELEVATE INSTALLATION'S.
SO FOR THIS FIRST ROUND
OF PROJECTS WE TRIED TO KIND
OF DISTRIBUTE THEM THROUGHOUT
OUR DOWNTOWN WE HAVE A
SCAVENGER HUNT THAT IS
THROUGHOUT DOWNTOWN A SUNSHADE
AT THE FARMER'S MARKET PLAZA.
WE FINDING PROJECT THAT
CONNECTS TO AND ACTUALLY
STRUCTURE TO CARRIE TOWN IN THE
FARMER'S MARKET A COUPLE
OF INSTALLATION IN LIBERTY
PLAZA AND A YET TO BE
DETERMINED INSTALLATION IN THE
SOUTH UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> SO THE FIRST PROJECT IS A
SCAVENGER HUNT.
WE ARE WORKING WITH DAVIDSEN.
>> I'M SURE EVERYONE'S FAMILIAR
WITH DAVID.
THIS IS GOING TO BE A SCAVENGER
HUNT OF TEN INSTALLS THROUGHOUT
DOWNTOWN.
>> YOU ALL KNOW HE TYPICALLY
WORKS IN CHALK BUT HE HAS
AGREED TO DO PERMANENT
INSTALLATIONS.
WE WANT TO INCORPORATE AN
INTERACTIVE ELEMENT SOMETHING
LIKE GEO CACHING THE CHARACTERS
OR CHARACTER THEY'LL BE A
THEME.
WE'RE LEAVING THAT UP TO DAVID
TO FIGURE OUT AND THE GOAL IS
TO ADD TO THIS EVERY YEAR SO
THIS YEAR WE'LL HAVE TEN
INSTALLATIONS HOPEFULLY YEARS
TO COME.
WE'LL CONTINUE TO ADD TO GIVE
PEOPLE, FAMILIES, YOUNG PEOPLE,
OLD PEOPLE MORE REASONS TO COME
DOWNTOWN AND LOOK FOR THESE
INSTALLATIONS.
SO I KNOW YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH
THIS WORK.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
CHARACTER OR A THEME IS YET BUT
WE'RE REALLY EXCITED AND THE
HOPE IS THAT THESE
INSTALLATIONS WILL BE IN
PROBABLY SPRING TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE.
>> THE SECOND PROJECT IS A SUN
SHADE IN THE FARMERS MARKET
PLAZA.
>> SO DENHA INSTALLED THIS
PLAZA AT THE FARMER'S MARKET
WHEN WE DID OUR FIFTH AND
DETROIT PROJECT.
IT'S ACTUALLY A GREAT PLAZA.
>> IT GETS A LOT OF USE.
IT HAS THE TIVOLI LIGHTING.
>> HOWEVER IT REALLY DOES NOT
HAVE A LOT OF SHADE.
THOSE TREES HAVEN'T MATURED YET
SO IN THE SUMMER IT IS NOT AS
PLEASANT IF IT'S A SUNNY DAY TO
TO BE SITTING THERE.
>> SO WE ARE LOOKING FOR
SOMETHING THAT'S FUNCTIONAL,
THAT BRINGS COLOR, THAT BRINGS
JOY TO THAT SPACE.
THE ANTICIPATED INSTALLATION IS
SUMMER TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
WE ARE WORKING WITH THE ART
CENTER.
THEY ISSUED THE RFP
IT'S
ACTUALLY DO THIS WEEK SO WE'RE
LOOKING FORWARD TO SEEING WHAT
WE GET FOR OUR PROPOSALS AND
THERE WILL BE A SELECTION
COMMITTEE WORKING ON THIS
PROJECT.
WE'LL HAVE REPRESENTATIVES FROM
COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL FROM
KOREATOWN TOWN.
WE HAVE OUR ACCESSIBILITY
COORDINATOR FROM THE CITY.
WE HAVE SOMEBODY FROM THE
PUBLIC ART COMMISSION AND A FEW
OTHERS.
UM SO THIS SHOULD ADD A NICE
ELEMENT TO THAT PART OF THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> OUR BIGGEST PROJECT THIS
ROUND IS A WAYFINDING PROJECT
CONNECTING THE AND ACTUALLY
PARKING STRUCTURE TO KOREATOWN
IN THE FARMER'S MARKET.
>> THIS PROJECT WILL BE KIND
OF MULTIPLE PIECES WE ARE
LOOKING FOR THE PROJECT TO
START AT THE END ACTUALLY
PARKING STRUCTURE ASSUMING SOME
TYPE OF MURAL AND THEN HAVE
ELEMENTS THAT GO EAST DOWN
MILLER KATHERINE AND THEN NORTH
DOWN FOURTH LEADING YOU RIGHT
TO THE FARMER'S MARKET.
>> WE ARE LEAVING IT UP TO THE
ARTIST TO DETERMINE WHETHER
IT'S 2D, 3D, HOW CREATIVE THEY
GET.
WE DON'T KNOW AGAIN WE'RE
WORKING WITH THE ART CENTER.
THE DEADLINE FOR THIS PROJECT
FOR THE PROPOSALS IS THE 20TH
SO WE SHOULD SOON SEE WHAT WHAT
TYPE OF PROJECTS THAT THAT WE
GET.
>> UM, OUR THIRD PROJECT IS A
MURAL IN LIBERTY PLAZA.
THIS IS A COLLABORATION WITH
CITY PARKS.
>> THEY WERE ALREADY PLANNING A
PROJECT IN LIBERTY PLAZA AND WE
ARE PARTNERING PARTNERING WITH
THEM AND WE ARE LOOKING TO
INTRODUCE ENERGY AND INTEREST
IN THE PLAZA BY APPLYING A
MURAL TO THE LOW WALL THAT RUNS
THROUGHOUT LIBERTY LIBERTY PARK
PLAZA AGAIN THE ART CENTER IS
ISSUING THE RFP.
I BELIEVE THE RFP GOES OUT THE
DOOR THIS WEEK SO THAT IT HAS
NOT YET BEEN ISSUED AND WE'RE
ANTICIPATING INSTALLATION IN
AGAIN SUMMER OR FALL ALSO IN
LIBERTY PLAZA WE WILL BE
INSTALLING A TEMPORARY LIGHT
AND SOUND INSTALLATION.
THE INSTALLATION IS CALLED
OSCILLATION.
IT'S THESE GIANT CRYSTALS THAT
YOU SEE AND THEY OPERATE LIKE A
C I THINK IT'S CALLED A
THURMON.
>> THAT INSTRUMENT THAT MAKES
KIND OF THE CREEPY HALLOWEEN
NOISES AND YOU DON'T YEAH.
YOU JUST YOU MOVE YOUR HANDS
BUT THERE'S NOTHING IT'S LIKE
MAGNETIC FIELDS OR SOMETHING.
>> YOU DON'T TOUCH ANYTHING.
SO THESE CRYSTALS OPERATE
SIMILAR TO THAT IN THAT WHEN
PEOPLE APPROACH THEM AND MAKE
NOISE THEY WILL MAKE SOUND AND
LIGHT UP.
>> SO WE'RE EXCITED ABOUT THIS
ONE.
>> IT WAS INTERESTING THERE ARE
SO MANY REALLY COOL LIGHT AND
SOUND INSTALLATIONS OUT THERE
LIKE TEMPORARINESS ELATIONS
THAT YOU CAN BRING IN.
>> AND WHAT WE FOUND IS WE
ACTUALLY DON'T HAVE A LOT
OF SPACE DOWNTOWN BIG ENOUGH TO
ACCOMMODATE THESE
INSTALLATIONS.
THERE WAS THIS GIANT FROG I
THINK I SHARED IT AT A COUNCIL
PRESENTATION SUPER COOL FROG.
>> WE WANTED TO BRING IN IT.
WE JUST DON'T HAVE THE SPACE.
SO LIBERTY PLAZA WAS THE ONLY
PLACE THAT WE ACTUALLY HAD
ENOUGH SPACE FOR THIS
OSCILLATION AND INSTALLATION
WHICH WAS ONE OF THE ONE OF THE
INSTALLATIONS WE WERE SUPER
INTERESTED IN SO THAT WE
ANTICIPATE IT WILL BE I THINK
AN EIGHT OR TWELVE WEEK
INSTALLATION PROBABLY MID
JANUARY TO MID-MARCH.
SO SOMETHING TO ADD INTEREST IN
THE WINTER, BRING PEOPLE
DOWNTOWN AND THEN THE FINAL
PROJECT WITH THIS FIRST ROUND
IS AN INTERACTIVE SOMETHING IN
THE SOUTH UNIVERSITY AREA WHEN
WE WERE MEETING WITH THE
NEIGHBORHOOD STAKEHOLDERS A FEW
TIME FOR CIRCULATION STUDY
PURPOSES WE REALLY HEARD FROM A
DESIRE TO BRING FAMILIES AND
NEAR NEIGHBORS BACK.
YOU KNOW, THINGS HAVE REALLY
CHANGED IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> I THINK THOSE BUSINESSES
FEEL LIKE THEY'VE LOST SOME
OF THEIR CUSTOMER BASE THAT
USED TO MAYBE WALK FROM THE
NEAR NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> SO WE WANT TO DO SOME TYPE
OF INTERACTIVE ART THAT APPEALS
TO YOUNG CHILDREN, COLLEGE
STUDENTS, YOU KNOW, YOUNG OLD,
SOME OF THE SOME OF THE IDEAS
ON THE RIGHT IS LIKE A HIDDEN
PICTURE TYPE OF THING WHICH I
THINK MOST PEOPLE WOULD FIND
INTERESTING.
>> THERE'S THE HOPSCOTCH.
THERE'S AN OBSTACLE COURSE
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS SO WE ARE
INVESTIGATING YOU KNOW, SPACE
AND WHAT WHAT WHAT WE CAN FIT
THEIR ELECTRICITY IS ALWAYS
ANOTHER PIECE FOR SOME OF THESE
.
SO YET TO BE DETERMINED AND
THAT ENDS THIS SECTION OF THE
PRESENTATION.
>> HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN QUESTIONS
,DISCUSSION ANYBODY QUESTIONS
PARTNER WITH THE LIBRARY IN ANY
FASHION WITH THE SCAVENGER HUNT
SINCE THEY THEY DO THE SUMMER
GAMES SO WELL YEAH.
WE HAVE NOT ENGAGED THE LIBRARY
WITH OUR DAVIDSEN PROJECT
HOWEVER WE ARE GOING TO BE
TALKING TO THE LIBRARY ABOUT
THE PROJECTS THAT WE'RE
EXPLORING RIGHT NOW THAT I
DON'T HAVE ALL THE INFORMATION
BUT THE LIBRARY IS A PARTNER
THAT WE WILL BE TALKING TO
SHOULD WE BE ABLE TO EXECUTE
ANYBODY?
SO THE ELEVATE PROGRAM SOUNDS
REALLY AWESOME AND YOU TALKED
ABOUT HOW SOME OF IT MIGHT BE
HISTORY AND STORYTELLING AND I
KNOW THAT PART OF THE CITY'S
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING IS THAT
DOING SOME SORT OF LIKE
EDUCATION ON HISTORY OF HOUSING
DISCRIMINATION IN OUR PROGRAM.
AND I WAS WONDERING IF LIKE
THERE MIGHT BE ANY OVERLAP OR
UM SO SO THE PROJECTS THAT WE
ARE CURRENTLY CONSIDERING HAS A
HISTORY AND STORY TELLING
ELEMENT AND IT'S RELATED TO END
STREET AND SOME OF THE
BUSINESSES THAT WERE PREVIOUSLY
ON THE STREET.
SO IT'S NOT NECESSARILY FROM
THE HOUSING PERSPECTIVE BUT
FROM A BUSINESS OWNER
PERSPECTIVE VERY SO YEAH.
>> THANKS.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS THINGS
THESE ARE EXCITING AND TO WORK
TRYING TO BRING ART INTO PUBLIC
SPACE AND BRING THAT INTO OUR
COMMUNITY.
THANKS.
UM AND I'M GLAD YOU'RE GIVING
US SOME ADDITIONAL ATTENTION.
DOES THAT UNIVERSITY WHERE I
THINK IT'S I CAN IMAGINE THE
BUSINESSES THEY'RE LOOKING FOR
THAT I HOPE THAT WE'RE IT
SOUNDS LIKE THE DESIRE IS TO
INTERACT AND ENGAGE FAMILIES AS
WELL AS UNIVERSITY STUDENTS AND
BRIDGING THAT GAP SO THAT IT'S
REALLY CATERS TO BOTH
AUDIENCES.
I THINK IT'S ENTIRELY
ACHIEVABLE BUT UM, HOPE WE IN
SOME WAYS KEEP THE STUDENT
POPULATION IS THERE AT THE
FOREFRONT ALSO RECOGNIZING HOW
THAT AND HOW THAT ALSO MIGHT
ENGAGE YOUNGER AUDIENCES AS
WELL BECAUSE I THINK IT CAN
EASILY DO BOTH BUT IT GOOD
WOULD BE A MISTAKE TO KIND
OF CATER TO THE YOU KNOW, A
YOUNGER AUDIENCE THAT MIGHT NOT
BE AS IS ENGAGING TO THE FOLKS
THAT ARE THERE ON A DAILY DAY
TO DAY BASIS.
YEAH, NO, I ABSOLUTELY AGREE
AND KNOW STUDENT THE STUDENT
POPULATION IS THE CUSTOMER
BASE.
THEY'RE LIKE THAT'S THAT'S A
FACT AND WE WOULD NOT IGNORE
THAT SO YEAH.
AND I THINK WITH SOME OF THESE
INSTALLATIONS THEY REALLY THERE
ARE SOME INSTALLATIONS THAT
REALLY DO APPEAL TO ALL AGES.
SO I THINK WE CAN I THINK WE
CAN MANAGE THAT AND THEN ON THE
FIRST PART MAYBE SOMETHING
THAT'S PROJECTS LIKE THIS TO
INSPIRING THE WORK THAT YOU'RE
ALREADY DOING LIKE THAT.
I KNOW THERE'S AN INTERESTING
ON THE JOE JOE LEWIS GREENWAY
THEY HAVE AN INTERESTING
HISTORY PROJECT WHERE THEY'VE
TRAINED FOLKS TO BECOME SORT
OF STORY GATHERERS AND THEY
THEN HAVE GONE OUT AND
COLLECTED STORIES FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND BROUGHT THEM
IN TO OK TO TO SHARE WITH FOLKS
WHO VISIT THE GREENWAY.
OH, I'M NOT FAMILIAR WITH IT.
YEAH,
ALL RIGHT, GOOD TO GO.
>> OK, ROUND THREE.
OK, SO THE FINAL PORTION
OF THIS PRESENTATION IS TO TALK
ABOUT THE WORK THAT WE HAVE
BEEN DOING ON OUR NEW
DEVELOPMENT PLAN SO JUST TO
START JUST TO KIND OF GROUND US
ALL WHAT IS A DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY?
>> WE ARE A COMPONENT UNIT
OF THE CITY AND WE ARE IN
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SCHOOL FOR
THE CITY AND IN DOWNTOWN ANN
ARBOR WE HAVE MANY TOOLS.
SOMETIMES I THINK IT GETS
CONFUSING THAT WE HAVE MANY
DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS JUST TO
KIND OF CLARIFY WHO'S DOING
WHAT THE BOLD OUTLINE THAT IS
THE LEADER'S FOOTPRINT THAT
SIXTY SEVEN BLOCKS OF DOWNTOWN
THE D.A. AND THE LDF SHARE THE
SAME FOOTPRINT FROM WHERE WE
DRAW OUR REVENUE.
>> THE DENHA IS FOCUSED ON
INFRASTRUCTURE, PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS, CAPITAL CAPITAL
PROJECTS AND MAINTENANCE.
DFA WHICH CONTRACTS WITH SPARK
IS LOOKING AT BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT AND BRINGING
BUSINESSES NOT ONLY INTO THAT
FOOTPRINT BUT THE SPARK HAS A
MUCH BROADER REACH.
YOU KNOW THERE THEY ARE PLACING
OR HELPING TO LOCATE BUSINESSES
NOT JUST IN DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR
BUT OUTSIDE OF OUR DOWNTOWN AS
WELL.
>> THE MAIN STREET BUSINESS
IS
THAT DOTTED LINE THAT AREA THE
BIZ A BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
ZONES OR BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICTS ARE WHEN A GROUP
OF PROPERTY OWNERS WITHIN A
DEFINED BOUNDARY IF 60 PERCENT
OF THEM AGREE TO REALLY SELF
ASSESS THE CERTAIN SERVICES.
SO IN THE MAIN STREET AREA THE
BIS SERVICES INCLUDE SIDEWALK
SNOW REMOVAL, SIDEWALK
CLEANING, LANDSCAPING, GRAFFITI
REMOVAL AND THEY RECENTLY ADDED
ALLEY CLEANING TO THAT LIST.
STATE STREET, THE STATE STREET
DISTRICT HAS BEEN TALKING ABOUT
THE POSSIBILITY OF FORMING BIDS
WHICH I THINK WOULD BE GREAT
FOR OUR DOWNTOWN AND THEN WE
HAVE FOUR AREA ASSOCIATIONS.
>> AREA ASSOCIATIONS ARE
TYPICALLY NONPROFITS.
THEY ARE USUALLY CHARGED WITH
ADVOCATING ON BEHALF OF THE
BUSINESSES WITHIN THEIR
DISTRICT.
THEY PUT ON EVENTS THEY THEY DO
PROMOTION.
THEY ARE USUALLY FUNDED BY DUES
AND SPONSORSHIP IN IN IN OUR
CASE WE HAVE STATE STREET
DISTRICT WHICH ALSO OPERATES AN
ART FAIR.
SO THEY HAVE ANOTHER FUNDING
SOURCE BUT IN GENERAL VOLUNTARY
DUES AND SPONSORSHIP ARE HOW
THOSE ORGANIZATIONS ARE FUNDED
.
SO TAX INCREMENT FINANCING THE
ANN ARBOR DAY IS FUNDED
EXCLUSIVELY BY TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING.
OTHER DAYS HAVE OTHER FUNDING
MECHANISM.
SOME DAYS HAVE A MILLAGE, SOME
DIVA'S OWN PROPERTY AND COLLECT
RENT.
WE ARE EXCLUSIVELY FUNDED
THROUGH TIF AND AS OF RECENTLY
WE HAVE TRIED TO APPLYING AND
HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
APPLYING FOR MORE GRANTS.
SO WE DO HAVE A VERY, VERY
SMALL PIECE OF OUR REVENUE FROM
FROM FROM GRANTS BUT IN GENERAL
IT'S TAX INCREMENT FINANCING.
TIF IS A CAPTURE OF A PORTION
OF TAXES WITHIN AN ESTABLISHED
DISTRICT TO FUND CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS.
>> TIF IS THE ONLY REVENUE
SHARING TOOL IN MICHIGAN.
THE CITY HAS TO FUND DOWNTOWN
INFRASTRUCTURE SO WITH TIF IT
IS THE CITIES IT GIVES THE CITY
THE ABILITY TO LEVERAGE TAX
DOLLARS FROM THE COUNTY, THE
LIBRARY, THE AL-ATTIYA AND
WASHTENAW COMMUNITY COLLEGE TO
HELP FUND INFRASTRUCTURE
DOWNTOWN WITHOUT THIS TOOL IN
PLACE ALL OF THE CAPITAL
PROJECTS MAINTENANCE AND
INFRASTRUCTURE WORK THAT THE
DENHA TAKES ON WOULD FALL ON
THE CITY AND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT YOU
KNOW, WE'RE LEVERAGING TAX
DOLLARS FROM OUR TAXING
AUTHORITY PARTNERS BUT OUR OUR
DOWNTOWN IS AN ECONOMIC ENGINE,
A SUCCESSFUL THRIVING DOWNTOWN
BENEFITS BEYOND JUST OUR SIXTY
SEVEN BLOCKS OF DOWNTOWN.
>> IT BENEFITS OUR ENTIRE
COMMUNITY AND IT REALLY DOES
BENEFIT THE REGION AND THE DEA
USES ABOUT 90 PERCENT OF OUR
TIF IS SPENT ON CAPITAL
PROJECTS AND MAINTENANCE.
>> SO WHY ARE WE THINKING ABOUT
AND WORKING ON CREATING A NEW
DEVELOPMENT PLAN?
>> OUR CURRENT PLAN WAS
CREATED IN TWO THOUSAND AND
THREE.
WHAT WE LEARNED FROM THE
RESEARCH THAT WE DID WITH OTHER
PEER DORS ACROSS THE STATE IS
THAT MOST EDA'S UPDATE THEIR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN ABOUT EVERY
SIX TO TEN YEARS THIS IS A
THIRTY YEAR PLAN.
THINGS CHANGE.
IT MAKES SENSE TO UPDATE THAT
PLAN A LITTLE BIT MORE
FREQUENTLY.
SO WE'RE GOING ON TWENTY ONE TO
TWENTY TWO YEARS.
SO IT'S TIME WE WANT THIS PLAN
TO REFLECT UPDATED CITY GOALS
AND ONGOING EFFORTS.
>> YOU KNOW EVERYTHING THE DDA
DOES IS IN SERVICE OF THE CITY.
WE ARE HERE TO HELP MOVE THE
NEEDLE ON CITY GOALS.
IT'LL GIVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
ADDRESS NEW OPPORTUNITIES AND
NEEDS FROM PANDEMIC
RECOVERY AND BEYOND AND THE AND
BEYOND IS THE PLANNING WORK
THAT WE ARE DOING RIGHT NOW.
IT'S SHOWING US THE DIRECTION
THAT WE NEED TO GO.
IT WILL ENSURE THE HIGHEST
LEVEL OF TRANSPARENCY AND
STEWARDSHIP AND BETTER ALIGN
WITH UPDATED STATE STATUTES,
STATE STATUTE WAS UPDATED IN
TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND WE WANT TO
MAKE SURE WE ARE IN COMPLETE
ALIGNMENT.
>> SO THE PROCESS WHERE ARE WE
IN A PROCESS WE HAVE DONE OUR
PEER CITY RESEARCH IS COMPLETE.
OUR BOARD HAS ESTABLISHED GOALS
FOR OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND I
WOULD NOTE THAT THOSE GOALS ARE
IN ALIGNMENT WITH THE STRATEGIC
STRATEGY CHECK CRITERIA THAT
THE CITY USES WHEN PRIORITY
HOUSING PROJECTS IN THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
SO THERE'S ALIGNMENT THERE
EXISTING CONDITIONS ASSESSMENT
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
HAPPENING THROUGH IT.
>> IT'S PART OF OUR DEVELOPMENT
PLAN BUT THAT WORK IS BEING
DONE THROUGH THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND THEN THE DEVELOPMENT
PLAN RECOMMENDATIONS ALL ALL
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE
PLAN ARE BEING INFORMED BY
PLANNING EFFORTS THAT ARE
HAPPENING RIGHT NOW.
>> THE TIF PLAN UPDATE THAT IS
THE THE NUMBERS PART OF THE
PLAN IT'S A REQUIREMENT AND IT
GIVES ESTIMATES OF TIF FUNDING
THROUGH THE NEXT 30 YEARS.
>> SO WE WILL WE HAVE NOT BEGUN
YET BUT WE WILL BEGIN DOING
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE ON TIF
FUNDING SCENARIOS AND WHEN I
SAY TO FUNDING SCENARIOS, WHAT
I MEAN BY THAT IS OUR OUR OUR
CURRENT STRUCTURE WE ARE CAPPED
AT THREE POINT FIVE PERCENT
RIGHT NOW OUR TIF CAPTURE IF WE
ARE TO TAKE ON OR EXPAND OUR
ROLE DOWNTOWN, AN ADJUSTMENT
WILL NEED TO BE MADE TO THAT
TIF CAPTURE SO WE WILL BE
RUNNING SCENARIOS WORKING WITH
OUR CONSULTANT TEAM, OUR
FINANCE TEAM CITY FINANCE
LOOKING AT SCENARIOS.
>> FINALLY WE WILL HAVE SUMMARY
DOCUMENTS AND APPROVALS AND OUR
GOAL IS TO HAVE THIS PLAN TO
YOU CITY COUNCIL BY NEXT SUMMER
.
>> SO DOWNTOWN PLANNING EFFORTS
ARE INFORMING OUR DEVELOPMENT
PLAN THE CITY COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS UPDATED AND REFINING A
DOWNTOWN VISION DDA BOUNDARY
RECOMMENDATIONS.
>> SO THE WORK THAT'S HAPPENING
IN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS
REALLY SHOWING A DESIRE FOR
DENSITY AND GROWTH TO EXPAND
BEYOND THE CURRENT FOOTPRINT
OF DOWNTOWN.
>> UM, PUBLIC SERVICES IS
COORDINATING A UTILITY CAPACITY
ASSESSMENT.
>> SO WHAT WE WANT TO KNOW IS
WHAT WATER MEANS HAVE NOT BEEN
UPSIZED WITHIN OUR FOOTPRINT
AND BEYOND AND WHERE CAN WE BE
HELPFUL ON THAT FRONT THE
DOWNTOWN CIRCULAR STUDY IS
FOCUSING ON CAPITAL PROJECTS.
MANY OF THE SECTIONS OF THESE
PROJECTS ARE OUTSIDE OF OUR
CURRENT BOUNDARIES.
WE BELIEVE THAT SOME OF THESE
PROJECTS ARE CRITICAL TO THE
VITALITY OF OUR CURRENT SIXTY
SEVEN BLOCK FOOTPRINT.
SO I DO THINK THE CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT DENHA EXPANSION IS GOING
TO BE A FRUITFUL AND IMPORTANT
CONVERSATION FOR US TO HAVE THE
MATURE STICTION TRANSFER STUDY.
>> WE KNOW THAT THAT IS A LONG
TERM PROBABLY NEGOTIATION
THAT'S GOING TO BE HAPPENING
BUT WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE DO NOTE THAT IN OUR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN BECAUSE
SEVENTEEN PERCENT OF THOSE
PROJECT AREAS ARE WITHIN OUR
FOOTPRINT.
>> THE DOWNTOWN GEOTHERMAL
STUDY WHICH HAS JUST GOTTEN
UNDERWAY WE DON'T REALLY HAVE
ANY INFORMATION FROM THAT STUDY
YET.
BUT AGAIN WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN THAT
WE HAVE GEOTHERMAL IN THE
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
SHOULD IT TURN OUT THAT THERE'S
FEASIBILITY FOR GEOTHERMAL
PROJECTS WITHIN WITHIN OUR
BOUNDARIES?
AND THEN FINALLY THE DOWNTOWN
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE
DISCUSSIONS SO CITY AND STAFF
HAVE BEEN HAVING DISCUSSIONS
ABOUT DOWNTOWN SERVICE AND
MAINTENANCE OVER THE PAST
REALLY YEAR AND OUR GOAL WAS TO
REALLY LOOK AT ALL OF THE
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE NEEDS
DOWNTOWN, IDENTIFY WHO IS
CURRENTLY TAKING CARE
OF DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF SERVICE
AND MAINTENANCE AND REALLY FIND
AREAS WHERE THERE ARE GAPS IN
AREAS WHERE THERE'S A LACK
OF CONSISTENCY AND ALSO THINGS
THAT MAYBE THE CITY IS
CURRENTLY DOING.
>> BUT IT REALLY MAKES MORE
SENSE FOR THE DENHA TO TO TAKE
ON.
SO WE ALSO IN OUR MEETINGS WITH
STAKEHOLDERS HAVE KIND
OF VETTED THESE IDEAS AND AND
ASKED FOR INPUT ON OTHER ITEMS
THAT PERHAPS WE'RE MISSING AND
WE'VE LANDED ON THIS LIST THAT
HAS BEEN PRETTY CONSISTENT
THROUGH ALL OF OUR DISCUSSIONS
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE
DELINEATOR MAINTENANCE, ALI,
POWER WASHING I DID MENTION
THAT THE BUSINESS TAKING ON
EARLY CLEANING AS A NEW SERVICE
BUT POWER WASHING IS NOT PART
OF THAT TO POWER WASH THE
ALLEYS REQUIRES I THINK IT'S
CALLED A VECTOR TRUCK.
IT'S SOMETHING SPECIAL THAT YOU
HAVE TO PUT IN THE DRAIN SO THE
WATER DOESN'T GO DOWN TO THE
HURON RIVER.
SO IT'S A MORE COMPLEX PROCESS
SIDEWALK RAMP, BUS STOP AND
BENCH SNOW REMOVAL.
I'M PRETTY SURE EVERY COUNCIL
MEMBER AT THIS TABLE DURING THE
WINTER HAS HAD THE SAME EMAIL
DDA STAFF HAS ALSO RECEIVED
WHEN WE HAVE A STORM THERE'S
ALWAYS THIS GAP STREETS GET
PLOWED, SIDEWALKS GET SHOVELED
AND THEN THOSE SIDEWALK RAMPS
ARE SORT OF NO MAN'S LAND
GRAFFITI AND HANDBILL REMOVAL,
PUBLIC RESTROOM MAINTENANCE
RIGHT NOW WE'VE GOT A GREAT
PILOT GOING.
WE REALLY DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
FUTURE OF THAT PILOT HOLDS.
WE DO KNOW THAT PUBLIC
RESTROOMS DOWNTOWN ARE A VERY
IMPORTANT AMENITY.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
HAVE SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE
FOR PUBLIC RESTROOMS IN OUR
PLAN SHOULD PERMANENT
INFRASTRUCTURE END UP BEING
BUILT?
EVENT BARRICADES?
>> WE KNOW THAT WE NEED A
BETTER SOLUTION FOR OUR EVENT
BARRICADES DOWNTOWN PUBLIC
SAFETY HAS RECENTLY BEEN OPEN
TO DISCUSSING OPTIONS OTHER
THAN THE PVS WHICH IS WHAT
WE'VE BEEN USING AND WHICH HAS
KIND OF LOCKED US INTO THE
SETUP THAT WE HAVE RIGHT NOW
NOW WITH THIS FLEXIBILITY AND
OPENNESS TO TALKING ABOUT OTHER
OPTIONS.
THE DDA WE FEEL THAT WE ARE
POISED TO SUPPORT THAT SIDEWALK
SWEEPING AND CLEANING WHEN
THERE ARE HIGH VISITOR VOLUME.
SO WE WOULD NOT BE SUGGESTING
AT THE DENHA TAKE ON A SERVICE
THAT PROPERTY OWNERS AND IN
SOME CASES THE BUSINESS ALREADY
DOES.
BUT IN CERTAIN INSTANCES WHEN
WE HAVE VERY LARGE CROWDS WE
CAN USE THE TEXAS GAME AS AN
EXAMPLE IF WE WANT TO REALLY BE
SHINING AND SHOWING OUR BEST
FACE.
>> THERE ARE TIMES WHEN WE NEED
A LITTLE BIT A LITTLE BIT EXTRA
DOWNTOWN.
UM, SO WE FEEL THAT IT SHOULD
THE DAY TAKE ON THESE SERVICES
WE COULD DO THEM WELL WE WOULD
MOST LIKELY TAKE AN APPROACH
SIMILAR TO HOW WE OPERATE OUR
PARKING SYSTEM WHERE WE HIRE A
CONTRACTOR WHO DOES ALL
OF THESE SERVICE KIND
OF HOLISTICALLY.
>> UM, WE HAVE HAD DISCUSSIONS
WITH GRAND RAPIDS DED.
>> THEY HAVE AN AMBASSADOR
PROGRAM.
>> IT'S RUN BY BLOCK BY BLOCK
WHICH IS THE COMPANY THAT IS
PRETTY MUCH HANDLING MOST
OF THE AMBASSADOR PROGRAMS.
YOU SEE AROUND THE COUNTRY.
THEY HAVE A REAL BIG MARKET
SHARE AND WE HAVE A MEETING
ACTUALLY SET UP WITH THEM TO TO
DISCUSS DETAILS.
UM, BUT A NUMBER OF YEARS AGO I
DON'T KNOW TEN OR FIFTEEN YEARS
AGO THE DDA TALKED ABOUT AN
AMBASSADOR PROGRAM.
I DON'T THINK IT WAS THE RIGHT
TIME AND PERHAPS IT JUST WASN'T
DISCUSSED IN THE RIGHT WAY.
BUT ACTUALLY WE'RE BLOCK BY
BLOCK WAS A COMPANY THAT THE
D.A. TALKED TO 15 YEARS AGO.
SO WE'RE KIND RIGHT BACK THERE.
BUT ALL OF THIS THE SERVICE AND
MAINTENANCE DISCUSSION IS
PREDICATED ON AN ADJUSTMENT, AN
ADJUSTMENT BEING MADE TO OUR
TIP CAP.
WE CAN'T ADD OR EXPAND OUR ROLE
IN THIS WAY WITHOUT AN
ADJUSTMENT TO THAT CAP.
AND FINALLY WE HAVE OUR NEXT
DOWNTOWN PLANNING OPEN HOUSE
WHICH IS A COLLABORATION WITH
THE CITY'S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
IT IS NEXT.
YEP, THAT IS NEXT WEEK I GUESS
NEXT WEDNESDAY THE TWENTY THIRD
FROM ELEVEN TO SEVEN.
I INVITE YOU ALL TO PLEASE JOIN
US IF ANYBODY IS INTERESTED IN
HAVING AN INDIVIDUAL
STAKEHOLDER MEETING WITH THE
CONSULTANT TEAM WE'RE OPEN TO
THAT.
>> I KNOW A FEW OF YOU DID THAT
AT OUR LAST ROUND OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT UM BUT THAT IS MY
LAST SLIDE IN SECTION THREE SO
WE CAN OPEN IT UP FOR QUESTIONS
AND DISCUSSIONS
.
THANK YOU.
THIS IS REALLY EXCITING TO SEE
.
I WANTED TO ASK WITH RESPECT TO
THE JURISDICTIONAL TRANSFER
STUDY YOU NOTED THAT CURRENTLY
SEVENTEEN PERCENT OF THE STUDY
AREA IS PART OF THE DAY IF THE
D BOUNDARIES WERE EXPANDED, DO
YOU HAVE AN IDEA OF HOW MUCH
MORE OF THE TRUNK LINE IT WOULD
DEPEND ON WHERE WE EXPAND WHICH
BIG QUESTION AND ACTUALLY AT
OUR UH AT THE PLANNING WORKSHOP
NEXT WEDNESDAY OUR BOARD IS
ACTUALLY HAVING A ME WE'RE
HOLDING A BOARD WORK SESSION
THERE AND THAT WILL WE WILL BE
INTRODUCING THE CONSULTANT TEAM
WILL BE INTRODUCING THAT
BOUNDARY DISCUSSION AND WILL
HAVE BOARDS FOR THE PUBLIC.
THIS IS ALL FOR THE PUBLIC.
SO WE WILL HAVE A FEW BOARDS
RELATED TO OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN
AT THE WORK SESSION AND THAT
THOSE BOUNDARIES WILL WE'LL BE
OUT THERE.
COULD YOU MAKE I MEAN IS IT
POSSIBLE AT THIS LATE DATE TO
SEE IF THOSE THAT AREA FOR
EXPANSION COULD SOMEHOW
INDICATE WHERE THE TRUNK LINE
AREAS ARE THAT COULD OR COULD
NOT BE?
I MEAN I KNOW THAT IF YOU COME
OUT FARTHER ON TO ME THAT'S
OBVIOUSLY ONE OF THE LINES I
DON'T SHUREN CLEARLY COULD BE
EXTENDED TO THAT WOULD BE AN
INTERESTING OVERLAY FOR PEOPLE
TO SEE IN ORDER TO MAYBE UM
HAVE A LITTLE MORE JUST
STRATEGIC CONSIDERATION
OF WHERE EXPANSION COULD BE.
YEAH, THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
I YEAH AND BUSINESS DENSITY IS
ALSO SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT
WHERE WHERE COULD AN EXPANSION
OF THE I'M THINKING ALWAYS
OF NORTH MAIN YOU KNOW WE JUST
WE'RE JUST CYCLING THROUGH
BUSINESSES ON NORTHMEN THEY
DON'T LAST BECAUSE IT'S NOT A
VERY FUN PLACE TO WALK OR CYCLE
SO THAT WOULD BE ANOTHER
STRATEGIC WAY OF THINKING BUT
PARTICULARLY IN OVERLAY
INDICATING HOW THAT COULD BE
HELPFUL WITH THE TRUNK LINE.
YEAH, IT'S A GOOD IDEA.
MAYBE HELPFUL.
UM, I REALLY, REALLY APPRECIATE
EVERYTHING ALL OF THE DETAIL
THAT YOU'RE GIVING US ABOUT THE
THINGS THAT COULD BE DONE UM OR
THAT YOU'RE INTERESTED IN DOING
THAT EITHER THAT ARE THAT ARE
FALLING THROUGH THE CRACKS THAT
WE HEAR A LOT OF QUALITY
OF LIFE CALLS AROUND THE THINGS
THAT YOU'VE ENUMERATED.
AND SO I REALLY, REALLY, UM
APPRECIATE THAT I WONDERED IF
YOU COULD SAY A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT UM THE ABOUT ABOUT THE
GEOTHERMAL STUDY AND HOW YOU
SEE THAT.
>> YEAH.
I'M GOING TO BE TOTALLY HONEST
WITH YOU.
>> I REALLY CAN'T SAY THAT I'M
SURE ABOUT IT BECAUSE WE HAVE
IT I KNOW THE STUDY BEGAN BUT
WE HAVE NOT BEEN INVOLVED YET.
I MEAN WE HAVE OUR PIECE OF IT.
WE'RE FUNDING THE PIECE THAT'S
COVERING DOWNTOWN BUT I I DON'T
HAVE AN UPDATE BUT I WILL GET
THAT FOR YOU.
>> I'LL FIND OUT WHERE IT
STANDS.
I DON'T KNOW.
THANK YOU.
OTHER QUESTIONS FOR SURE.
PORTABLE WATER MAIN EXPANSION I
DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT EVERYONE THINKS ABOUT WHEN
THEY THINK ABOUT THE DEBATE BUT
I KNOW THAT THAT WAS VERY
HELPFUL IN THE KATHERINE STREET
PROJECT SOME OF THE WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE WORK YOU GUYS
PUT IN.
SO KUDOS ON THAT AND I'M GLAD
THAT THAT'S A BIG PART OF THE
DISCUSSION.
WE TALK ABOUT DENSITY.
>> UM, ONE QUESTION THIS IS
MAYBE A LITTLE OUTSIDE BUT IN
THE SLIDE, YOU KNOW, WHEN
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THE ITEMS
THAT ARE MISSING LACKING
CONSISTENCY I THINK I HAD HEARD
ABOUT UH CAN I AS I STARTED MY
RUN FOR COUNCIL WAS RELATED TO
TRASH AND TRASH PICKUP.
I KNOW OBVIOUSLY THAT'S OF CORE
CITY SERVICE BUT ARE YOU STILL
HEARING FROM BUSINESSES
QUESTIONS ABOUT DUMPSTERS AND
TRASH CUMULATION AND IS THERE
ANY ANY AREA WHERE THAT MIGHT
BE INCLUDED IN AN IDEA OF AN
EXPANSION FROM DENHA?
YEAH, SO YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT.
I MEAN THAT THE SOLID WASTE
DISCUSSION HAS BEEN HAPPENING
FOR YEARS.
IT CONTINUES WE'VE HEARD A LOT
THROUGH OUR STAKEHOLDERS
DISCUSSION PROBLEMS IN THE
ALLEYS AND UM AS YOU SAID,
THAT'S A CITY SERVICE SO I
DON'T SEE THAT AS ANYTHING THAT
THE DEA WOULD BE STEPPING INTO
.
HOWEVER, UM DOING
INFRASTRUCTURE WORK IN THE
ALLEYS TO HELP WITH WHETHER
IT'S SHIELDING DUMPSTERS,
MAKING IT EASIER FOR TRASH
COLLECTION TO HAPPEN IS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ARE
INTERESTED IN AND AS A MATTER
OF FACT WE HAVE AND HAVE HAD AN
ALLEY WE'LL CALL IT A PILOT
PROJECT IN OUR SIPI FOR A VERY
LONG TIME AND WE SOMEDAY STAFF
HAVE ALREADY STARTED THE
DISCUSSIONS.
I WAS NOT PART OF IT WITH CITY
STAFF TO THINK ABOUT AN ALLEY
THAT WE CAN PILOT AND AND LOOK
INTO WHETHER IT'S BUILDING
SOMETHING ARTFUL THAT'S
SHIELDING THE DUMPSTERS.
SO WE'RE COGNIZANT OF THAT
ISSUE BUT TRY TO BE REALLY
ABOUT HOW MUCH WE CAN WE CAN
ACTUALLY DO THAT MAKES A LOT
OF SENSE AND THANKS I MEAN THAT
IS KIND OF WHAT I WAS THINKING
ALONG THE LINES OF IT WAS THE
ALLEYS AND THE DUMPSTERS AND
DUMPSTERS SHIELDING SOUNDS
PROMISING SO I'LL STAY TUNED.
>> OAK COUNCIL MEMBERS ON
MARACAY WALK THROUGH A LITTLE
BIT OF THE ENTITLEMENT WORK
THAT YOU GET INVESTED IN OR FOR
PROJECTS, DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
AND WHAT'S NEXT AFTER THIS.
>> SO FOR PRE ENTITLEMENT WE
FUNDED PRE ENTITLEMENT IT LET'S
SEE IF MY MEMORY SERVES ME
WELL.
I'M PRETTY SURE FOR FIFTEEN
MONTHS WASHINGTON WE FUNDED PRE
ENTITLEMENT AT THREE FIFTY S
FIFTH THAT MAY THAT MAY BE IT
SO THAT THOSE WERE PARTNERSHIPS
WHERE THE CITY CAME TO TO US UM
REQUESTING THAT FUNDING DO WE
SEE OTHER BUT MORE BUDGETING
TOWARDS PRE ENTITLEMENT WITH
OTHER PARCELS UM NOT TO MY
KNOWLEDGE YOU KNOW I'M I'M
THINKING ABOUT CITY OWNED
PROPERTIES AND THE HOUSING
COMMISSION AND WE HAVE NOT BEEN
ENGAGED IN ANY OF THOSE
CONVERSATIONS SO NOT TO MY
KNOWLEDGE BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN
THAT IT'S NOT HAPPENING AT SOME
POINT.
OK,
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
UH, YOU'RE DONE WITH YOUR
PORTION, CORRECT?
>> I AM.
>> ANYTHING ELSE I JUST
APPRECIATE ALL OF YOU AND GO
WITH THE PRESENTATION WE TALKED
ABOUT BRINGING SO NO, THAT'S
IT.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL THEN UH, WE NOW COME TO
PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> PUBLIC COMMENT IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND
COMMUNITY AND IN THIS INSTANCE
TODAY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST, UH,
SPEAKERS HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
DELIVER REMARKS AND WE CAN ONLY
HAVE ONE SPEAKER SPEAKING AT A
TIME FOR THOSE SPEAKING, I
ASSUME THE CITY WILL NOTIFY YOU
WHEN YOU HAVE THIRTY SECONDS
REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR TIME
HAS EXPIRED.
>> UM, PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME
AND FEEL FREE TO GIVE YOUR
REMARKS HERE IN PERSON OF THE
UNIVERSITY I AM ERIC.
I LIVE ACROSS PARK BUT I CAN'T
GET YOU IT BECAUSE THERE'S A
TRAIN TRACK.
>> I CREATE A PARK WITH A
TUNNEL TO IT BUT I CAN'T GET TO
IT BECAUSE THERE'S A TRAIN.
>> YEAH YEAH.
SO I WAIT AND I MADE A CIRCLE
OF OUR LIVES RADIUS OF FOURTEEN
OR IN AN AREA OF SIX HUNDRED
YARDS I MEAN OBSTACLE COURSE
OF TREES IS A FEW OBSTACLES
LEADING UP TO A GIANT TREE THAT
THERE'S A MASSIVE ZIP LINE
HANGING DOWN TO THE STARTING
TREES YOU CAN DO IT OVER AND
OVER AND AGAIN THE PAVEMENT
COVERS ONE THOUSAND SEVEN
HUNDRED SIXTY SQUARE YARDS AND
DIRT TRAILS COVER EIGHT HUNDRED
FOURTEEN SQUARE YARDS.
I INCLUDED BATHROOM AND INCLUDE
TRASH CANS SO PEOPLE COULD WELL
DO WHAT THEY HAVE TO DO.
UM ALSO I INCLUDE A FENCE THE
KIDS WOULDN'T HAVE TO GO
WOULDN'T GO TRAIN TRACK AND GET
CRUSHED BY THE TRAIN.
YEAH I MADE A LARGE PLATE FOR
THAT HAS AN AREA OF TWO OR SIX
YARDS AND HAS A PERIMETER
OF SIXTY FOUR YARDS AT SIXTEEN
BY 60 YARDS I MADE ME A
VEGETABLE VEGETABLE GARDEN I
HAD AN AREA OF ONE THOUSAND
FIVE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHT YARDS
AND A PERIMETER OF ONE HUNDRED
AND SIXTY SIX YARDS AND A
THIRTY TWO POINT FORTY EIGHT
YARDS ON TOP OF ALL THAT I ALSO
HAVE A GARDEN WITH THE AREA
OF ONE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED
AND SIXTY EIGHT YARDS AND
PERIMETER OF SIX YARDS.
IT'S ALSO THIRTY TWO BY FORTY
EIGHT YARDS.
THE MAIN FOR MY GARDEN IS IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE ENTIRE PLACE
AND YOU CAN YOU MAKE YOUR OWN
FAIR HOUSE IN THE VERY GARDEN I
APPOINT PARK AND I HAVE A GREAT
DAY.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING ME.
I'M ERIC.
I'M AGE TEN AND MOST IN FIFTH
GRADE.
I'M TOO YOUNG TO VOTE BUT
ADULTS SHOULD VOTE FOR KAMALA
HARRIS.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE IN THE
ROOM WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS
THE LOBBY?
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ON THE BOTTOM
?
WE HAVE TWO CALLERS ON ONLINE
BUT I DON'T SEE THAT THEY'RE
RAISING THEIR HANDS TO SPEAK TO
WITH THAT WE WILL CLOSE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
WE NOW COME TO COMMUNICATIONS
FROM COUNCIL OR IN THIS CASE
COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCIL AND
THE DDA IF ANYONE HAS ANY
COMMUNICATIONS THIS EVENING
SEEING NONE WE ARE ADJOURNED.
GREAT PRESENTATION, SUPERB JOB
SEARCH